1880. Thomas Edison invents the incandescent light bulb.  1897.  Ferdinand Braun

creates the world’s first CRT display.  1964.  The first plasma screen.  1972. The first

LCD.   And in 1987, the world’s most technologically advanced electronic display technology

was developed: the Organic Light Emitting Diode. The OLED.

        The OLED works almost identically to an ordinary LED with the exception that it

uses organic semiconductors. The OLED is composed of four layers: the cathode terminal, the

emissive layer, the conductive layer, the anode terminal, and the substrate. The more

organic layers an OLED has, the better it works. Extra layers increase an OLED's

efficiency, give it a gradual electronic profile, and/or prevent charges from being wasted.

        There are two steps to how an OLED works. First, a voltage is applied across the

OLED. This causes the anode to become positively charged with the respect to the cathode.

It causes a current of electrons to flow from the cathode to the anode, and the emissive

layer receives electrons from the cathode. On the other hand, the conductive layer loses

electrons, creating electron holes. (Electron holes are basically the lack of an electron.)

Next, negatively charged electrons recombine with the positively charged holes in the

emissive layer. The resulting drop in the energy level of the electrons causes the emission

of visible radiation from the emissive layer, which we, the viewers, see.

        OLEDs are not just an evolutionary step in electronic devices, but an outstanding

revolution in the fields of home and industrial lighting and electronic screens.  OLEDs’

first major benefit is that it does not need a backlight like LCDs.  This provides two

benefits.  First, it allows future OLED screens to produce “true” blacks.  LCDs’ blacks are

currently limited by their backlights, which cannot turn off and constantly “bleed” light

onto the screen.  OLEDs do not have this problem and can create “blacks” in the truest

sense, the absence of light by physically turning individal pixels off.

        Second, this lack of a backlight reduces the power draw of the OLED screens

significantly.  This allows manufacturers to either get the same battery life from a device

out of a smaller battery pack or get a much greater battery life out of the same exact

battery.  Modern phones are almost exclusively designed around their batteries, which limit

their size.  Phones need to be a certain size because who really wants a small phone if it

won’t even last a few hours?  OLEDs’ lower energy requirements allow manufacturers to make

smaller phones with better screens.

        OLEDs also have a much greater range of colors, gamut, brightness, and contrast,

giving these already amazing little screens an even better picture quality than their

power-sucking counterparts.  The screens also have a far smaller response times than LCD

displays, currently 0.01 milliseconds versus 2 ms for the fastest LCDs on the market.  This

allows OLEDs to more effectively show fast moving images such as sports without added

blurriness or an effect known as “ghosting.”

        OLED screens fourthly are much, much, much thinner than other screen technologies. 

Sony’s latest venture into OLED technology yielded a screen only 0.3 millimeters thick! 

That’s a fully functional screen that is less than 4 times the width of a human hair!  In

fact their completed television had an overall thickness of just 3 millimeters!  Truly

amazing.

        Perhaps the greatest advantage of OLEDs is their unique manufacturing process.  The

organic materials can be printed out onto substrates essentially the exact same way your

inkjet printer at home squirts ink onto paper.  First, this will vastly reduce the cost of

OLEDs compared to the expensive manufacturing processes of LCD and plasma screens.  But

secondly, and most importantly, OLEDs can be printed onto flexible surfaces.  In theory, we

could live in a world where we can have little, or even big, electronic screens on our

shirts, our wallpaper, and even our cars!  Someday, you just might have a monitor made of

OLEDs that you can just roll up and carry in your back pocket, making a truly portable

portable computer.
       
        So, the next time you think of buying an LCD screen, think again! The OLED will

soon bring about a new age in electronic displays, revolutionizing our technology. Perhaps,

some day, it might even earn a place as one of our greatest technological achievements,

right next to Edison's lightbulb.